
    Panini 0.71.xx  Release Notes	25 June 2009

Version 0.71 improves the eye position controls and
eliminates a difference between cubic and 2D panos in
Recenter mode.

Version 0.7 adds two new features requested by users:

1) Overlay (for Luca Vascon) -- overlays a fixed image,
with adjustable transparency, on the view.  This is
useful for matching the view to a reference such as
a drawing, a painting or another photograph.

2) Recenter (for Peter Gawthrop) -- an alternative
viewing mode, in the Presets menu. The eye point can
be placed anywhere inside the panosphere, and the view
direction rotates around the eye point instead of the
panosphere center.   This gives views like Peter's
"recentered equirectangular projections".

The keyboard and mouse view controls are more rational
and convenient.  Specifically:
-- There are view menu items and keyboard shortcuts for
   Eye X and Y shifts and the "framing" shifts.
-- Shift right mouse now controls Eye X and Y, and the
   less useful hFov/vFov are now Shift left+right mouse.

A couple of minor Mac bugs (may have been) fixed.

At version 0.6, pvQt has been renamed "Panini".
Update 0.61 (SVN 77) fixes some UI bugs. It uses native
file selector dialogs on Windows and OSX because some
Mac users have reported difficulty with the Qt dialog.

Update 0.62 adds the ability to make Pannini views from
cubic panoramas, and to control alignment of the image
on the pancylinder.

Update 0.63 adds a Mac-specific limit on the size of cubic
images, and fixes a big memory leak related to cubic images.
It also remembers the last-used window size and position.

This is a beta release of software that is under active
development and will be replaced by a better version in
the not-too-distant future.  So you should expect to find
some bugs.  Please report those, either on the hugin-et-al
discussion group:
http://groups.google.com/group/hugin-ptx
or the pvQt project's bug tracker at SourceForge:
http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?group_id=241632&atid=1116683
You may find a newer release at:
http://sourceforge.net/projects/pvqt/

The main new features in version 0.6 are:
-- cylindrical panosurface enables "Panini projection" for
   convincing perspective effects in wide angle views (not
   available for cubic source images).
-- The range of eye distance has been enlarged and the
   controls for it linearized.  It is now possible to sweep
   the viewing projection from linear through stereographic
   or Panini, all the way to sinusoidal.
-- There are presets for the 3 principal viewing projections.
-- framing controls shift view center with respect to screen
   window.
-- can shift eye point sideways as well as radially, for
   "software view camera" effects.

Some other improvements
-- fewer errors in input deprojection functions (some
   still need work)
-- a bug in cubic picture loading has ben fixed.

Update 0.61 adds these bug fixes and UI improvements:
-- The menu for choosing source image format is now titled "Source" (was "Picture")
-- You can choose to see the wire frame panosphere models instead of an image
-- Panocylinder is automatically selected for non-cubic source formats; so just hit
   "P" to see the Pannini projection.
-- The current panosurface type is always displayed correctly
-- All window titles now say "Panini"
-- The program has a nice icon with a pano of the Erasmus Bridge in Rotterdam,
   that was perspective-corrected with Panini.

Update 0.62 adds these enhancements:
-- Pannini projections of cubic panoramas can now be displayed.
-- Angular alignment of the image on the panosurface can be adjusted via a
   new "Turn" dialog.  For cubic panos only, Yaw and pitch can be set to put
   the axis of the panosurface anywhere in the spherical image.
-- Panosurface is now selected by clicking a button at bottom of window.
   Another such button cycles through the non-cubic input projections.  Menu
   items for these have been removed.
-- Mouse control can be made vertical-only by holding Alt. or horizontal-only
   by holding Control.  This may not work on Linux, depending on X11 options.
-- Framing shifts are displayed on status line, and reset along with eye shifts.
-- More errors in the input mappings have been fixed.

Update 0.63 addds two persistent settings:
-- window size and position are saved at shutdown and restored at launch.
   The initial default size is now smaller to accommodate the small wide-
   format screens on some newer laptops.
-- On Macs, cubic image resolution is limited to solve an OSX bug that causes
   garbled display or even system crashes with large cubic texture maps.
   The default limit of 1536 x 1536 (13.5 megapixels) should work on many recent
   Macs, but if yours needs a smaller limit, or you want to push the limit higher,
   you can change it via "Mac cube size" in the Presets menu.

Version 0.70 fixes these bugs:
-- initial window position was under menu bar on Mac
-- save file name extension now defaults to ".jpg" on Mac as it does
   on Linux and Windows.

Version 0.71 revises the controls as follows
-- in Recenter mode, eye Distance now sets the radial distance from
   panocenter, like normal mode, but maximum eye radius is 0.93.
-- in Recenter mode, eye X and Y now control Yaw and Pitch angles
   that specify the direction of the eye point shift.  They are set to 
   the current view direction when you switch to Recenter mode.
-- Status display shows eye Distance in radii as "eD".  In normal mode
   it shows eye Shifts in radii as "eS(x, y)".  In Recenter mode it
   shows eye Angles in degrees as "eA(yaw, pitch)"; this is the
   view direction along which the eye position is shifted.  It now
   shows the Framing shifts, in radii, as "fS(x, y)".
-- Eye position now moves in mouse direction (was reversed).
-- The view no longer shifts much when eye position changes.
-- Homing the view direction no longer exits Recenter mode.
-- A secret mouse mode that could cause unexpected results has been
   removed.

Known issues and limitations:
-- Due to a bug in OSX, it is not possible to display cubic images
   at full hardware resolution on a Mac.
-- There are still some small memory leaks that could cause crashes
   after very long periods of use.
-- Displayed vFov angle is correct only for the panosphere and for
   eye distances between 0 and 1.
-- still does not read PT scripts/projects
-- To save higher resolution views, your OpenGL must support off-
   screen framebuffers of arbitrary size.

A set of test images, all made from one spherical panorama, is available
for download as a separate package.

The Win32 and Mac binary packages have been built with Qt 4.5.0 (LGPL), and contain
executable Qt libraries from that version.  If you build your own, Qt version 4.4.2
or later should work.

LICENSE

Panini 0.7 is free software, copyright (C) 2008 - 2009 Thomas K Sharpless.
You can redistribute and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public
License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.

Panini 0.7 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License version
3 along with Panini 0.7; if not, write to Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA

